Since kindergarten my daughter has attended a small private school that regularly likes to boast that it is ranked at or near the top for Louisiana. The not inconsiderable tuition it charges is something my wife and I consider the tax we pay for not living in a state that funds education. The school was recommended to us because of its small class sizes, and we enrolled our daughter because the school also promised an individuated curriculum for her. For the record, that never materialized, but we rationalized keeping her in the school based on the small class sizes and not wanting to take her away from friendships which had formed over the years. (As a kid who got bounced around a bunch of schools, I was especially loathe to have my daughter go through what I had.)

As she made her way through a series of alternately really stellar teachers and a couple of true stinkers, we imagined that these were also valuable life lessons: one encounters difficult people and you have to find a way through or around them. Plus, we were regularly assured that the high school portion of the school was where its excellence lay and that the only way to guarantee a spot in the high school roster was to endure the elementary and middle schools. There were, I admit, sufficient flags during this time that we should have taken our child, and our money, and gone elsewhere, but, again, we felt like we were investing in the excellence of the educational program and honoring our child’s now years-long friendships.

Along the way we endured a number of end-of-year award ceremonies, which always struck me as defeating the school’s proclaimed motto of ”staying in the struggle” by validating only a handful of kids with awards. Watching the show, and it was a show clearly carefully staged by the school, it was obvious from watching the ensemble of faces that the kids getting awards were the ones that everyone knew already as a teacher’s favorite and that what was happening on stage was a kind of public confirmation of their private (and collective) misery. Year in and year out the ceremonies unfolded in much the same way.

To be clear, our daughter won an award or two along the way. There was even a year when the faculty seemed to have undergone a re-think and tried to honor non-traditional students for their efforts and accomplishments — by non-traditional I mean the students who weren’t in the habit of collecting all the annual awards. But apparently that re-think was quashed somewhere along the way, because the awards settled back into a celebration of what the school considered its “stars.”

I once had a debate with one of the school officials about the nature of “stars” and the end-of-year ceremonies. Having watched enough of these performances to catch the occasional glimmer of hope in a kid’s eyes that maybe this year was their only to watch their shoulders slump, their spirit crushed, as the usual suspect’s name was called. I reported that I found the whole system corrosive to the school as a learning community, one of the things they liked to talk about, and to students “staying in the struggle.” His response was that by focusing on “stars” the school held up a standard for other students to strive for. To be clear, the school was heavily invested in its having “master teachers,” and so if you’re going to have masters, then you have to have stars, I guess. (The other implication of masters, especially given that the school sits on the grounds of what was once a plantation was not something, as later events would reveal, they are able to consider. I left it alone.)

There were some bright spots in the high school years. First, my daughter developed a remarkable ability to adapt to the absurdity of the school’s moral compass through sarcasm and humor. Second was the arrival of a couple of teachers and a dean of students who recognized the flaws in the school’s notions of leadership and wanted to try to change things. Sadly, those same idealistic young teachers, all women, either left or were let go within a few years, and any real efforts to address equity were first shelved and then simply dropped. (We sat in one meeting with the headmaster where he promised our daughter a role in what was going to be an equity audit of the school, and then, with the teacher leading it asked to leave, that promise left with her.)

Along the way our daughter continued to keep up her grades while playing at the highest level of the local club soccer scene, which often meant practices three times a week. We knew there would be no academic awards for her, but when she found herself with gastroenteritis because of medication for a back injury or with a second concussion which made it hard for her to recall facts and ideas, we were stunned by the school’s lack of concern, let alone accommodation. Administrators were, we discovered, very good at sounding concerned and seeming to agree to things only to change their minds or to enforce punishing regimes later, often against the wish of teachers. Because standards, we were told … well, scolded, really.

So, when the final award ceremony, graduation, arrived, we were glad to go and to see the end of what had become a rather unpleasant overall experience for us and our daughter — again, more than a few teachers were exceptions to this, some of whom recognized the battle our daughter fought and kept up with her after she had passed through their classes. But we were in no way prepared for a ceremony in which the same handful of students would now not only receive awards but would be offered five-minute long paeans to their excellence.

What was truly frightful was the active fiction-making that occurred during these speeches: a kid who had simply done extremely well in terms of his grades was now elevated to being an “academic leader.” He was praised for helping others — we knew from overhearing other students talk that no such help, let alone leadership had ever occurred, so maybe his “stardom” was how he helped? No matter. The paeans continued apace, until having spent an hour on awards for getting good grades or “school loyalty” or patriotism, the school had exhausted its rhetorical flourish and proceeded to spend an entire fifteen minutes handing out diplomas. (A nice finishing tough, so far as our daughter was concerned, was that she hadn’t even made it part way back to her seat, as the final graduate, before the headmaster started up the recessional.)

Most of the school admins beamed afterwards, unaware that what their show had actually done, by giving all the awards (for the most part) to the same six kids out of sixty, was reveal an utter failure on their part to be able to engage 90% of the students. No, the ceremony, made clear: these are the talented tenth; these are our stars. Any other organization would be concerned that only ten percent of their results were great. Schools are different this way, perhaps, being able to rely on bell curves to rationalize that people, on the whole are average, but when you claim that you are the best, like our daughter’s school does, and when you focus on small cohorts and small class sizes, you would think there would be more weight given to innovation, finding ways to find students where they are and get them where you think they need to be.

What the school’s broken model of excellence reveals is that its commitment is not to education so much as reinforcing a norm in which ostensible hard work matters, in which performance of loyalty matters, and appealing to authority figures matters. This of course reinforces the local political system, which also rests on a class system wherein the upper classes largely send their kids to private schools with public education for those who will work for the kids who went to private schools. (If you think I am being rhetorical here, see my account of Lawrence Lessig’s visit to Lafayette for an account of the local school superintendent interceding in events to assure the city’s moneyed that they needed to care about public education because it provided them with workers and with social stability. I kid you not.)

No one is doubting that the handful of kids who received virtually all the awards did not work for it in some fashion. The real question is at what point did all the other kids simply stop working because they saw they were never going to succeed in the eyes of the school? How many girls stopped trying because breaking through the school’s legendary commitment to its “special boys” just wasn’t worth it — and, to be clear, the top awards went to two boys.

The real loss the school has inflicted, I think, is on its now former students who have lost respect for it as an institution and, perhaps, now approach institutions with a jaundiced eye. (To be fair, this might be a good thing, but not an intended outcome of the school’s behavior.) The loss I lament the most is for my daughter, who now resists any moment in which she might be seen as performative. Having watched all too many moments in which kids either consciously or unconsciously performed for a teacher, she now considers any such activity as corrupt or corrupting and pushes back, hard, when we suggest that she should consider letting herself shine.

It’s this impulse to self-sabotage for whichI now hold the school responsible, and not just for my daughter’s sake but for all the other kids. And I hold the school accountable for its role in a larger system of inculcating self-sabotage among so many individuals who might otherwise have contributed not only to a more exciting, and inclusive, educational experience, but also to a more innovative, an inclusive, future for all of us. In focusing on “stars” who match expectation set by “master teachers,” my daughter’s (thankfully former) school participates in the enslavement of everyone else within a system which considers that the best is available only to a few and not to the many.